1.
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was
with God, and the Word was God.
The same was in the beginning with God.
All things were made by him, and without him was not anything made that was made.
In him was life, and the life was the light of men, and the light shineth in darkness,
and the darkness comprehended it not.
There was a man sent from God, whose name was John, the same came for a witness, to
bear witness of the light, that all men through him might believe.
He was not that light, but was sent to bear witness of that light, that was the true light,
which lighteth every man that cometh into the world.
He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not.
He came unto his own, and his own received him not.
But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to
his name, which were born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will
of man, but of God.
And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory, the glory as
of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth.
John bare witness of him, and cried, saying, This was he of whom I spake, he that cometh
after me, is preferred before me, for he was before me.
And of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace.
For the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.
No man hath seen God at any time.
The only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him.
And this is the record of John.
When the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, Who art thou?
And he confessed, and denied not, but confessed, I am not the Christ.
And they asked him, What then?
Art thou Elias?
And he saith, I am not.
Art thou that prophet?
And he answered, No.
Then said they unto him, Who art thou, that we may give an answer to them that sent us?
What sayest thou of thyself?
He said, I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make straight the way of the Lord.
As said the prophet Esaias, And they which were sent were of the Pharisees.
And they asked him, and said unto him, Why baptizest thou then, if thou be not that Christ,
nor Elias, neither that prophet?
John answered them, saying, I baptize with water.
But there standeth one among you, whom ye know not.
He it is, who coming after me is preferred before me, whose shoes latch it, I am not worthy to unloose.
These things were done in Bethabara, beyond Jordan, where John was baptizing.
The next day John seeth Jesus coming unto him, And saith, Behold, the Lamb of God,
which taketh away the sin of the world.
This is he of whom I said, After me cometh a man, which is preferred before me.
For he was before me, and I knew him not.
But that he should be made manifest to Israel, Therefore am I come, baptizing with water.
And John bare record, saying, I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and it abode upon him.
And I knew him not.
But he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me.
Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and remaining on him,
the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost.
And I saw, and bare record, that this is the Son of God.
Again the next day after, John stood, and two of his disciples,
and looking upon Jesus as he walked, he saith, Behold, the Lamb of God.
And the two disciples heard him speak, and they followed Jesus.
Then Jesus turned, and saw them following, and saith unto them, What seek ye?
They said unto him, Rabbi, which is to say, being interpreted, Master, where dwellest thou?
He saith unto them, Come and see.
They came, and saw where he dwelt, and abode with him that day, for it was about the tenth hour.
One of the two which heard John speak, and followed him, was Andrew, Simon Peter's brother.
He first findeth his own brother Simon, and saith unto him, We have found the Messiahs,
which is, being interpreted, the Christ.
And he brought him to Jesus, and when Jesus beheld him, he said, Thou art Simon, the son of Jonah.
Thou shalt be called Cephas, which is by interpretation, a stone.
The day following, Jesus would go forth into Galilee, and findeth Philip, and saith unto him, Follow me.
Now Philip was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter.
Philip findeth Nathaniel, and saith unto him, We have found him, of whom Moses in the law and the prophets did write,
Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph.
And Nathaniel said unto him, Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth?
Philip saith unto him, Come and see.
Jesus saw Nathaniel coming to him, and saith of him, Behold, an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile.
Nathaniel saith unto him, Once knowest thou me?
Jesus answered and said unto him, Before that Philip called thee, When thou wast under the fig tree, I saw thee.
Nathaniel answered and saith unto him, Rabbi, thou art the son of God, thou art the king of Israel.
Jesus answered and said unto him, Because I said unto thee, I saw thee under the fig tree, believest thou?
Thou shalt see greater things than these.
And he saith unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Hereafter ye shall see heaven open,
and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the son of man.
And the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee, and the mother of Jesus was there,
and both Jesus was called and his disciples to the marriage.
And when they wanted wine, the mother of Jesus saith unto him, They have no wine.
Jesus saith unto her, Woman, What have I to do with thee? Mine hour is not yet come.
His mother saith unto the servants, Whatsoever ye saith unto you, do it.
And there were set there six water-pots of stone, after the manner of the purifying of the Jews,
containing two or three firkins apiece.
Jesus saith unto them, Fill the water-pots with water, and they filled them up to the brim.
And he saith unto them, Draw out now, and bear unto the governor of the feast, and they bear it.
When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made wine,
and knew not whence it was, but the servants which drew the water knew,
the governor of the feast called the bridegroom, and saith unto him,
Every man at the beginning doth set forth good wine, and when men have well drunk, then that which is worse.
But thou hast kept the good wine until now.
This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee,
and manifested forth his glory, and his disciples believed on him.
After this he went down to Capernaum, he and his mother and his brethren, and his disciples,
and they continued there not many days.
And the Jews' Passover was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem,
and found in the temple those that sold oxen and sheep and doves, and the changers of money sitting.
And when he had made a scourge of small cords, he drove them all out of the temple and the sheep and the oxen,
and poured out the changers' money, and overthrew the tables, and said unto them that sold doves,
Take these things hence, make not my father's house, and house of merchandise.
And his disciples remembered that it was written, The zeal of thine house hath eaten me up.
Then answered the Jews, and said unto him,
What signs showest thou unto us, seeing that thou doest these things?
Jesus answered, and said unto them,
Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.
Then said the Jews,
Forty and six years was this temple in building,
And wilt thou rear it up in three days?
But he spake of the temple of his body.
When therefore he was risen from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this unto them,
and they believed the scripture, and the word which Jesus had said.
Now when he was in Jerusalem at the Passover, in the feast day,
many believed in his name when they saw the miracles which he did.
But Jesus did not commit himself unto them,
because he knew all men, and needed not that any should testify of man,
for he knew what was in man.
There was a man of the Pharisees,
named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews.
The same came to Jesus by night, and said unto him,
We know that thou art a teacher come from God,
for no man can do these miracles that thou doest, except God be with him.
Jesus answered and said unto him,
Verily, verily, I say unto thee,
Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.
Nicodemus saith unto him,
How can a man be born when he is old?
Can he enter the second time into his mother's womb and be born?
Jesus answered, Verily, verily, I say unto thee,
Except a man be born of water, and of the Spirit,
he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.
That which is born of the flesh is flesh,
and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit.
Marvel not that I said unto thee, ye must be born again.
The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof,
but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth.
So is every one that is born of the Spirit.
Nicodemus answered and said unto him,
How can these things be?
Jesus answered and said unto him,
Art thou a master of Israel, and knowest not these things?
Verily, verily, I say unto thee,
We speak that we do know, and testify that we have seen,
and ye receive not our witness.
If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not,
how shall ye believe, if I tell you of heavenly things?
And no man hath ascended up to heaven,
but he that came down from heaven,
even the Son of Man which is in heaven.
And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness,
even so must the Son of Man be lifted up,
that whosoever believeth in him should not perish,
but have eternal life.
For God so loved the world,
that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whosoever believeth in him should not perish,
but have everlasting life.
For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world,
but that the world through him might be saved.
He that believeth on him is not condemned,
but he that believeth not is condemned already,
because he hath not believed in the name
of the only begotten Son of God.
And this is the condemnation,
that light is come into the world,
and men loved darkness rather than light,
because their deeds were evil.
For every one that doeth evil hateth the light,
neither cometh to the light,
lest his deeds should be reproved.
But he that doeth truth cometh to the light,
that his deeds may be made manifest,
that they are wrought in God.
After these things came Jesus and his disciples
into the land of Judea,
and there he tarried with them and baptized.
And John also was baptizing in Aenea near to Salim,
because there was much water there,
and they came and were baptized.
For John was not yet cast into prison,
and there arose a question between some of John's disciples
and the Jews about purifying.
And they came unto John, and said unto him,
Rabbi, he that was with thee beyond Jordan,
to whom thou bearest witness, behold,
that same baptizeth, and all men come to him.
John answered and said,
A man can receive nothing,
except it be given him from heaven.
Ye yourselves bear me witness,
that I said I am not the Christ,
but that I am sent before him.
He that hath the bride is the bridegroom,
but the friend of the bridegroom,
which standeth and heareth him,
rejoiceth greatly,
because of the bridegroom's voice.
This my joy therefore is fulfilled.
He must increase, but I must decrease.
He that cometh from above is above all.
He that is of the earth is earthly,
and speaketh of the earth.
He that cometh from heaven is above all.
And what he hath seen and heard,
that he testifieth,
and no man receiveth his testimony.
He that hath received his testimony,
hath set to his seal that God is true.
For he whom God hath sent,
speaketh the words of God.
For God giveth not the Spirit by measure unto him.
The Father loveth the Son,
and hath given all things into his hand.
He that believeth on the Son,
hath everlasting life.
And he that believeth not the Son,
shall not see life,
but the wrath of God abideth on him.
When therefore the LORD knew how the Pharisees had heard
that Jesus made and baptized more disciples than John,
though Jesus himself baptized not but his disciples,
he left Judea and departed again into Galilee,
and he must needs go through Samaria.
Then cometh he to a city in Samaria,
which is called Sychar,
near to the parcel of ground
that Jacob gave to his son Joseph.
Now Jacob's well was there.
Jesus therefore, being wearied with his journey,
sat thus on the well,
and it was about the sixth hour.
There cometh a woman of Samaria to draw water.
Jesus saith unto her,
Give me to drink,
for his disciples were gone away unto the city to buy meat.
Then saith the woman of Samaria unto him,
How is it that thou, being a Jew,
askest drink of me,
which am a woman of Samaria?
For the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans.
Jesus answered and said unto her,
If thou knewest the gift of God,
and who it is that saith to thee,
Give me to drink,
thou wouldest have asked of him,
and he would have given thee living water.
The woman saith unto him,
Sir, thou hast nothing to draw with,
and the well is deep.
From whence then hast thou that living water?
Art thou greater than our father Jacob,
which gave us the well and drank thereof himself,
and his children, and his cattle?
Jesus answered and said unto her,
Whosoever drinketh of this water
shall thirst again.
But whosoever drinketh of the water
that I shall give him
shall never thirst.
But the water that I shall give him
shall be in him a well of water
springing up into everlasting life.
The woman saith unto him,
Sir, give me this water,
that I thirst not, neither come hither to draw.
Jesus saith unto her,
Go, call thy husband, and come hither.
The woman answered and said,
I have no husband.
Jesus said unto her,
Thou hast well said, I have no husband,
for thou hast had five husbands,
and he whom thou now hast
is not thy husband.
In that saidest thou truly.
The woman saith unto him,
Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet.
Our fathers worshiped in this mountain,
and ye say that in Jerusalem
is the place where men ought to worship.
Jesus saith unto her,
Woman, believe me,
the hour cometh,
when ye shall neither in this mountain
nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father.
Ye worship, ye know not what.
We know what we worship,
for salvation is of the Jews.
But the hour cometh, and now is,
when the true worshipers shall worship the Father,
in spirit and in truth,
for the Father seeketh such to worship him.
God is a spirit,
and they that worship him
must worship him in spirit and in truth.
The woman saith unto him,
I know that Messiah's cometh,
which is called Christ.
When he is come,
he will tell us all things.
Jesus saith unto her,
I that speak unto thee am he.
And upon this came his disciples,
and marvelled that he talked with the woman.
Yet no man said,
What seekest thou?
or, Why talkest thou with her?
The woman then left her water-pot,
and went her way into the city,
and saith to the men,
Come see a man,
which told me all things,
that ever I did,
is not this the Christ.
Then they went out of the city,
and came unto him.
In the meanwhile,
his disciples prayed him,
saying, Master, eat.
But he said unto them,
I have meat to eat,
that ye know not of.
Therefore said the disciples one to another,
Hath any man brought him ought to eat?
Jesus saith unto them,
My meat is to do the will of him that sent me,
and to finish his work.
Say not ye,
there are yet four months,
and then cometh harvest?
Behold, I say unto you,
lift up your eyes,
and look on the fields,
for they are white already to harvest.
And he that reapeth receiveth wages,
and gathereth fruit unto life eternal,
that both he that soweth,
and he that reapeth,
may rejoice together.
And herein is that saying true,
one soweth,
and another reapeth.
I sent you to reap,
that whereon ye bestowed no labour.
Other men laboured,
and ye are entered into their labours.
And many of the Samaritans of that city
believed on him,
for the saying of the woman which testified,
he told me all that ever I did.
So when the Samaritans
were come unto him,
they besought him,
that he would tarry with them,
and he abode there two days.
And many more believed
because of his own word,
and said unto the woman,
Now we believe,
not because of thy saying,
for we have heard him ourselves,
and know that this is indeed the Christ,
the Saviour of the world.
Now after two days,
he departed thence,
and went into Galilee,
for Jesus himself testified,
that a prophet hath no honour
in his own country.
Then when he was come into Galilee,
the Galileans received him,
having seen all the things
that he did at Jerusalem,
at the feast,
for they also went unto the feast.
So Jesus came again
into Cana of Galilee,
where he made the water wine.
And there was a certain nobleman,
whose son was sick at Capernaum.
When he heard that Jesus
was come out of Judea into Galilee,
he went unto him,
and besought him,
that he would come down
and heal his son,
for he was at the point of death.
Then Jesus said unto him,
Except ye see signs and wonders,
ye will not believe.
The nobleman saith unto him,
Sir, come down,
ere my child die.
Jesus saith unto him,
Go thy way, thy son liveth.
And the man believed
the word that Jesus had spoken unto him,
and he went his way.
And as he was now going down,
his servants met him,
and told him, saying,
Thy son liveth.
Then inquired he of them,
the hour when he began to amend.
And they said unto him,
Yesterday, at the seventh hour,
the fever left him.
So the father knew,
that it was at the same hour
in which Jesus said unto him,
Thy son liveth,
and himself believed,
and his whole house.
This is again the second miracle
that Jesus did,
when he was come out of Judea into Galilee.
recordings are in the public domain. For more information or to volunteer, please visit
After this, there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem. Now there is,
Jerusalem by the sheep market, a pool, which is called in the Hebrew tongue Bethesda,
having five porches. In these lay a great multitude of impotent folk, of blind,
halt, withered, waiting for the moving of the water. For an angel went down at a certain season
into the pool, and troubled the water. Whosoever then, after the troubling of the water,
stepped in, was made whole of whatever dis-ease he had. And a certain man was there, which had
infirmity thirty and eight years. When Jesus saw him lie, and knew that he had been now a long time
in that case, he sayeth unto him, Wilt thou be made whole? The impotent man answered him, Sir,
I have no man when the water is troubled to put me into the pool. But while I am coming
another stepeth down before me. Jesus sayeth unto him, Rise, take up thy bed, and walk.
And immediately the man was made whole, and took up his bed, and walked, and on the same day
was the Sabbath. The Jews therefore said unto him that was cured, It is the Sabbath day,
it is not lawful for thee to carry thy bed. He answered them, He that made me whole, the same,
said unto me, Take up thy bed, and walk. Then asked they him, What man is that which said unto
thee, Take up thy bed, and walk? And he that was healed, wist not who it was, for Jesus had
conveyed himself away, a multitude being in that place. Afterward Jesus findeth him in the temple,
and said unto him, Behold, thou art made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.
The man departed, and told the Jews that it was Jesus which had made him whole. And therefore did
Jews persecute Jesus, and sought to slay him, because he had done these things on the Sabbath
day. But Jesus answered them, My father worketh hither too, and I work. Therefore the Jews sought
the more to kill him, because he not only had broken the Sabbath, but said also that God was
his father, making himself equal with God. Then answered Jesus, and said unto them,
Verily, verily, I say unto you, The son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth the father
do. For what things soever he doeth, these also doeth the son likewise. For the father loveth the son,
and showeth him all things that himself doeth, and he will show him greater works than these
that ye may marvel. For as the father raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth them, even so the son
quickeneth whom he will. For the father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the son,
that all men shall honor the son, even as they honor the father. He that honoreth not the son,
honoreth not the father which hath sent him. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that heareth my word,
and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation,
but is passed from death unto life. Verily, verily, I say unto you, the hour is coming,
and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live.
For as the father hath life in himself, so hath he given the son to have life in himself,
and hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man. Marvel not at
this, for the hour is coming, in which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall
come forth, they that have done good unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil
unto the resurrection of damnation. I can of mine own self do nothing, as I hear I judge,
and my judgment is just, because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath
sent me. If I bear witness of myself, my witness is not true. There is another that beareth witness
of me, and I know that the witness which he witnesseth of me is true. Ye sent unto John,
and bear witness unto the truth, but I receive not testimony from man, but these things I say,
that ye might be saved. He was a burning and shining light, and ye were willing for a season
to rejoice in his light. But I have greater witness than that of John, for the works which
the Father hath given me to finish, the same works that I do bear witness of me, that the Father
hath sent me, and the Father himself which hath sent me, hath borne witness of me. Ye
have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his shape, and ye have not his word
abiding in you, for whom he hath sent him ye believe not. Search the scriptures, for in them
ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they which testify of me, and ye will not come to me
that ye might have life. I receive not honor from men, but I know you that ye have not the love of
God in you. I am come in my Father's name, and ye receive me not. If another shall come in his own
name, him ye will receive. How can ye believe which receive honor one of another, and seek not
the honor that cometh from God only? Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father.
There is one that accuseth you, even Moses, in whom ye trust. For had ye believed Moses,
ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me. But if ye believe not his writings,
how shall ye believe my words
After these things, Jesus went over the Sea of Galilee, which is the Sea of Tiberias,
and a great multitude followed him, because they saw his miracles, which he did on them
that were diseased. And Jesus went up into a mountain, and there he sat with his disciples,
and the Passover, a feast of the Jews, was nigh. When Jesus then lifted up his eyes,
and saw a great company come unto him, he saith unto Philip, Whence shall we buy bread that these
may eat? And this he said to prove him, for he himself knew what he would do. Philip answered
him, Two hundred penny worth of bread is not sufficient for them, that every one of them
may take a little. One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, saith unto him,
There is a lad here which hath five barley loaves and two small fish, but what are they
among so many? And Jesus said, Make the men sit down. Now there was much grass in the place,
so the men sat down, in number about five thousand. And Jesus took the loaves,
and when he had given thanks, he distributed to the disciples, and the disciples to them that were
set down, and likewise of the fish, as many as they would. When they were filled, he said unto
the disciples, Gather up the fragments that remain, that nothing be lost. Therefore they
gathered them together, and filled twelve baskets with the fragments of the five barley loaves, which
remained over and above unto them that had eaten. Then those men, when they had seen the miracle
that Jesus did, said, This is of a truth, that profit, that should come into the world.
When Jesus therefore perceived that they would come and take him by force to make him a king,
he departed again into a mountain himself alone. And when even was now come, his disciples went
down unto the sea, and entered into a ship, and went over the sea toward Capernaum. And it was
now dark, and Jesus was not come to them. And the sea arose by reason of a great wind that blew.
So when they had rowed about five and twenty or thirty furlongs, they see Jesus walking on the water,
and they were afraid. But he sayeth unto them, It is I, be not afraid. Then they willingly received
him into the ship, and immediately the ship was at the land whither they went. The day following
when the people which stood on the other side of the sea saw that there was none other boat there,
save that one wherein his disciples were entered, and that Jesus went not with his disciples into
the boat, but that his disciples were gone away alone, howbeit there came other boats from Tiberias
nigh unto the place where they did eat bread after that the Lord had given thanks. When the people
therefore saw that Jesus was not there, neither his disciples, they also took shipping, and came
to Capernaum seeking for Jesus. And when they had found him on the other side of the sea,
they said unto him, Rabbi, when camest thou hither? Jesus answered them and said, Verily,
verily, I say unto you, Ye seek me, not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the
boats, and were filled, labor not for the meat which perisheth, but for that meat which endureth
unto everlasting life, which the Son of Man shall give unto you, for him hath God the Father sealed.
Then said they unto him, What shall we do, that we might work the works of God?
Jesus answered and said unto them, This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he hath
sent. They said therefore unto him, What sign showest thou then, that we may see and believe thee?
What dost thou work? Our fathers did eat manna in the desert, as it is written,
He gave them bread from heaven to eat. Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you,
Moses gave you not that bread from heaven, but my Father giveth you the true bread from heaven.
For the bread of God is he which cometh down from heaven, and giveth life unto the world.
Then said they unto him, Lord, evermore give us this bread. And Jesus said unto them, I am
the bread of life. He that cometh to me shall never hunger, and he that believeth on me shall
never thirst. But I said unto you, that ye also have seen me and believed not. All that the Father
giveth me shall come to me, and him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out. For I came down
from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. And this is the Father's will
which hath sent me, that of all which he hath given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up
again at the last day. And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one that seeth the Son
and believeth on him may have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day.
The Jews then murmured at him, because he said, I am the bread which came down from heaven.
And they said, is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know?
How is it then that he sayeth I came down from heaven? Jesus therefore answered and said unto them,
murmur not among yourselves, no man can come to me except the Father which hath sent me draw him,
and I will raise him up at the last day. It is written in the prophets, and they shall be all
taught of God, every man therefore that hath heard and hath learned of the Father cometh unto me.
Not that any man hath seen the Father, save he which is of God, he hath seen the Father.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believeth on me hath everlasting life. I am that bread of
life. Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness and are dead. This is the bread which cometh down
from heaven, that a man may eat thereof and not die. I am the living bread which came down from
heaven. If any man eat of this bread, he shall live forever, and the bread that I will give
is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. The Jews therefore strove among themselves
saying, how can this man give us his flesh to eat? Then Jesus said unto them, verily, verily, I say
unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, ye have no life in you.
Whosoever eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood hath eternal life, and I will raise him up at the
last day. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. He that eateth my flesh and
drinketh my blood dwelleth in me and I in him, as the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the
Father, so he that eateth me, even he shall live by me. This is that bread which came down from
heaven, not as your fathers did eat manna and are dead. He that eateth of this bread shall live
forever. These things said he in the synagogue as he taught in Capernaum. Many therefore of his
disciples when they had heard this said, this is an hard saying, who can hear it? When Jesus knew
in himself that his disciples murmured at it, he said unto them, doth this offend you? What? And
ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before? It is the spirit that quickeneth,
the flesh profiteth nothing. The words that I speak unto you, they are spirit and they are life.
But there are some of you that believe not. For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were that
believed not and who should betray him. And he said, therefore said I unto you, that no man can
come unto me except it were given unto him of my father. From that time many of his disciples went
back and walked no more with him. Then said Jesus unto the twelve, will ye also go away? Then
Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou hast the words of eternal life.
And we believe and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God.
Jesus answered them, have not I chosen you twelve? And one of you is a devil. He spake of Judas
Iscariot, the son of Simon. For he it was that should betray him, being one of the twelve.
After these things Jesus walked in Galilee. For he would not walk in jewelry because
the Jews sought to kill him. Now the Jews' feast of Tabernacle was at hand. His brethren therefore
said unto him, depart hence and go into Judea that thy disciples also may see the works
that thou doest. For there is no man that doeth anything in secret and he himself seeketh to be
known openly. If thou do these things, show thyself to the world. For neither did his brethren believe
in him. Then Jesus said unto them, my time is not yet come, but your time is always ready.
The world cannot hate you, but me it hateth, because I testify of it that the works thereof
are evil. Go ye up unto this feast. I go not up yet unto this feast, for my time is not yet full come.
When he had said these words unto them, he abode still in Galilee. But when his brethren were gone
up, then went he also up unto the feast, not openly, but as it were in secret. Then the Jews
sought him at the feast and said, where is he? And there was much murmuring among the people
concerning him. For some said he is a good man, others said nay, but he deceived the people.
Howbeit no man spake openly of him for fear of the Jews. Now about the midst of the feast,
Jesus went up into the temple and taught. And the Jews marveled, saying, how knoweth this man
betters, having never learned. Jesus answered them, and said, My doctrine is not mine,
but his that sent me. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine,
whether it be of God, or whether I speak of myself. He that speaketh of himself seeketh
his own glory. But he that seeketh his glory that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness
is in him. Did not Moses give you the law, and yet none of you keepeth the law? Why go ye about
to kill me? The people answered and said, Thou hast a devil, who goest about to kill thee?
Jesus answered and said unto them, I have done one work, and ye all marvel. Moses therefore
gave unto you circumcision, not because it is of Moses, but of the fathers. And ye on the Sabbath
day circumcise a man. If a man on the Sabbath day receive circumcision, that the law of Moses
should not be broken, are ye angry at me, because I have made a man every whit whole on the Sabbath
day? Judge not according to the appearance, but judge righteous judgment. Then said some of them
of Jerusalem, Is not this he whom they seek to kill? But lo, he speaketh boldly, and they say
nothing unto him. Do the rulers know indeed that this is the very Christ? Howbeit we know
this man whence he is, but when Christ cometh, no man knoweth whence he is. Then cried Jesus
in the temple as he taught, saying, Ye both know me, and ye know whence I am, and I am not come
of myself. But he that sent me is true, whom ye know not, but I know him, for I am from him,
and he hath sent me. Then they sought to take him, but no man laid hands on him, because his hour
was not yet come. And many of the people believed on him, and said, When Christ cometh,
will he do more miracles than these which this man hath done? The Pharisees heard that the people
murmured such things concerning him, and the Pharisees and the chief priests sent officers
to take him. Then said Jesus unto them, Yet a little while am I with you, and then I go
unto him that sent me. Ye shall seek me and shall not find me, and where I am thither
ye cannot come. Then said the Jews among themselves, Whither will he go that we shall
not find him? Will he go unto the dispersed among the Gentiles and teach the Gentiles?
What manner of saying is this that he said, Ye shall seek me and shall not find me,
and where I am thither ye cannot come? In the last day, the great day of the feast,
Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink.
He that believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers
of living water. But this spake he of the Spirit which they that believe on him should receive,
for the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet glorified. Many of the
people therefore, when they heard this saying, said of a truth, This is the prophet. Others said,
This is the Christ. But some said, Shall Christ come out of Galilee? Hath not the scripture said
that Christ cometh of the seed of David, and out of the town of Bethlehem, where David was?
So there was a division among the people because of him, and some of them would have taken him,
but no man laid hands on him. Then came the officers to the chief priests and Pharisees,
and they said unto them, Why have ye not brought him? The officers answered, Never man spake like
this man. Then answered them the Pharisees, Are ye also deceived? Have any of the rulers or
of the Pharisees believed on him? But this people who knoweth not the law are cursed.
Nicodemus saith unto them, He that came to Jesus by night, being one of them, doth our law
judge any man before it hear him, and know what he doeth. They answered and said unto him, Art thou
also of Galilee? Search and look, for out of Galilee ariseth no prophet. And every man went
unto his own house.
Jesus went unto the Mount of Olives, and early in the morning he came again into the temple,
and all the people came unto him, and he sat down and taught them. And the scribes and the
Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in adultery, and when they had set her in the midst
they said unto him, Master, this woman was taken in adultery in the very act. Now Moses
in the law commanded us that such should be stoned, but what sayest thou? This they said,
attempting him, that they might have to accuse him. But Jesus duped down, and with his finger
wrote on the ground, as though he heard them not. So when they continued asking him, he lifted up
himself, and said unto them, He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her.
And again he stooped down, and wrote on the ground. And when they which heard it being
convicted by their own conscience, went out one by one, beginning at the eldest, even unto the last.
And Jesus was left alone, and the woman standing in the midst. When Jesus had lifted up himself,
and saw none but the woman, he said unto her, Woman, where are those thine accusers? Hath no
man condemned thee? She said, No man, Lord. And Jesus said unto her, Neither do I condemn thee,
go, and sin no more. Then spake Jesus again unto them, saying, I am the light of the world,
he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life.
The Pharisees therefore said unto him, Thou bearest record of thyself, thy record is not true.
Jesus answered and said unto them, Though I bear record of myself, yet my record is true,
for I know whence I came, and whither I go. But ye cannot tell whence I come, and whither I go.
Ye judge after the flesh, I judge no man. And yet, if I judge, my judgment is true, for I am not
alone, but I am the Father that sent me. It is also written in your law, that the testimony of two
men is true. I am one that bear witness of myself, and the Father that sent me, beareth witness of me.
Then said they unto him, Where is thy Father? Jesus answered, Ye neither know me nor my Father.
If ye had known me, ye should have known my Father also. These words spake Jesus in the treasury,
as he taught in the temple. And no man laid hands on him, for his hour was not yet come.
Then said Jesus again unto them, I go my way, and ye shall seek me, and shall die in your sins.
Whither I go, ye cannot come. Then said the Jews, Will he kill himself? Because he sayeth,
whither I goeth, ye cannot come. And he said unto them, Ye are from beneath, I am from above.
Ye are of this world, I am not of this world. I said therefore unto you, that ye shall die in
your sins. For if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins. Then said they unto him,
Who art thou? And Jesus sayeth unto them, Even the same that I said unto you from the beginning.
I have many things to say, and to judge of you. But he that sent me is true, and I speak to the
world those things which I have heard of him. They understood not that he spake to them of the Father.
Then said Jesus unto them, When ye have lifted up the Son of man, then shall ye know that I am he,
and that I do nothing of myself, but as my Father has taught me. I speak these things,
and he that sent me is with me. The Father hath not left me alone, for I do always those things
that please him. As he spake these words, many believed on him. Then said Jesus to those Jews,
which believed on him. If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed,
and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free. They answered him, We be Abraham
and were never in bondage to any man. How sayest thou? Ye shall be made free.
Jesus answered them, Verily, verily I say unto you, Whosoever committeth sin is the servant of sin,
and the servant abideth not in the house forever, but the Son abideth forever.
If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed. I know that ye are Abraham seed,
but ye seek to kill me, because my word hath no place in you. I speak that which I have seen
with my Father, and ye do that which ye have seen with your Father. They answered and said unto him,
Abraham is our Father. Jesus saith unto them, If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do
the works of Abraham. But now ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you the truth,
which I have heard of God. This did not Abraham. Ye do the deeds of your Father.
Then said they to him, We be not born of fornication. We have one Father, even God.
Jesus said unto them, If God were your Father, ye would love me. For I proceeded forth and came
from God. Neither came I of myself, but he sent me. Why do ye not understand my speech?
Even because ye cannot hear my word. Ye are of your Father the devil, and the lust of your
Father ye will do. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because
there is no truth in him. When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own, for he is a liar,
and the Father of it. And because I tell you the truth, ye believe me not. Which of you convinced
me of sin? And if I say the truth, why do ye not believe me? He that is of God heareth God's words.
Ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God. Then answered the Jews and said unto him,
Say we not well, that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a devil. Jesus answered, I have not a devil,
but I honor my Father, and ye do dishonor me. And I seek not my own glory, there is one that seeketh
and judgeth. Verily, verily I say unto you, if a man keep my saying, he shall never see death.
Then said the Jews unto him, now we know that thou hast a devil, Abraham is dead, and the prophets,
and thou sayest, if a man keep my saying, he shall never taste death. Art thou greater than our Father
Abraham, which is dead, and the prophets are dead? Whom makest thou thyself? Jesus answered,
if I honor myself, my honor is nothing. It is my Father that honoreth me, of whom ye say
that he is your God. Yet ye have not known him, but I know him. And if I should say I know him not,
I shall be a liar, like unto you. But I know him, and keep his saying. Your Father Abraham rejoiced
to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad. Then said the Jews unto him, thou art not yet fifty
years old, and hast thou seen Abraham? Jesus said unto them, verily, verily I say unto you,
before Abraham was, I am. Then took they up stones to cast at him, but Jesus hid himself,
and went out of the temple, going through the midst of them, and so passed by.
9.
And as Jesus passed by, he saw a man which was blind from his birth.
And his disciples asked him, saying, Master, who did sin, this man, or his parents, that
he was born blind?
Jesus answered, Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents, but that the works of God
should be made manifest in him.
I must work the works of him that sent me while at his day.
The night cometh when no man can work.
As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.
When he had thus spoken, he spat on the ground and made clay of the spittle, and he anointed
the eyes of the blind man with the clay.
And he said unto him, Go, wash in the pool of Siloam, which is by interpretation, sent.
He went his way therefore and washed, and came seeing.
The neighbours therefore, and they which before had seen him, that he was blind, said, Is
not this he that sat and begged?
Some said, This is he.
Others said, He is like him.
But he said, I am he.
Therefore said they unto him, How were thine eyes opened?
He answered and said, A man that is called Jesus made clay and anointed mine eyes, and
said unto me, Go to the pool of Siloam and wash.
And I went and washed, and I received sight.
Then said they unto him, Where is he?
He said, I know not.
They brought to the Pharisees him that aforetime was blind, and it was the Sabbath day when
Jesus made the clay and opened his eyes.
Then again the Pharisees also asked him how he had received his sight.
He said unto them, He put clay upon mine eyes, and I washed, and do see.
Therefore said some of the Pharisees, This man is not of God, because he keepeth not
the Sabbath day.
Others said, How can a man that is a sinner do such miracles?
And there was division among them.
They say unto the blind man again, What sayest thou of him, that he hath opened thine eyes?
He said, He is a prophet.
But the Jews did not believe concerning him that he had been blind and received his sight,
until they called the parents of him that had received his sight.
And they asked them saying, Is this your son, who ye say was born blind?
How then doth he now see?
His parents answered them and said, We know that this is our son, and that he was born blind.
But by what means he now seeth, we know not.
Or who hath opened his eyes, we know not.
He is of age, ask him, he shall speak for himself.
These words spake his parents, because they feared the Jews, for the Jews had agreed already
that if any man did confess that he was Christ, he should be put out of the synagogue.
Therefore said his parents, He is of age, ask him.
Then again called they the man that was blind, and said unto him, Give God the praise,
we know that this man is a sinner.
He answered and said, Whether he be a sinner or no, I know not.
One thing I know, that whereas I was blind, now I see.
Then said they to him again, What did he to thee, how opened he thine eyes?
He answered them, I have told you already, and ye did not hear.
Wherefore would ye hear it again?
Will ye also be his disciples?
Then they reviled him and said, Thou art his disciple, but we are Moses' disciples.
We know that God spake unto Moses, as for this fellow, we know not from whence he is.
The man answered and said unto them, Why, hearing is a marvellous thing,
that ye know not from whence he is, and yet he hath opened mine eyes.
Now we know that God heareth not sinners, but if any man be a worshiper of God and doeth his will,
him he heareth.
Since the world began, was it not heard that any man opened the eyes of one that was born blind?
If this man were not of God, he could do nothing.
They answered and said unto him, Thou wast altogether born in sins, and dost thou teach us?
And they cast him out.
Jesus heard that they had cast him out, and when he had found him, he said unto him,
Dost thou believe on the Son of God?
He answered and said, Who is he, Lord, that I might believe on him?
And Jesus said unto him, Thou hast both seen him, and it is he that talketh with thee.
And he said, Lord, I believe, and he worshipped him.
And Jesus said, For judgment I am come into this world, that they which see not might see,
and that they which see might be made blind.
And some of the Pharisees which were with him heard these words and said unto him, Are we blind also?
Jesus said unto them, If ye were blind, ye should have no sin.
But now ye say, We see, therefore your sin remaineth.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold,
but climbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber.
But he that entereth in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep.
To him the porter openeth, and the sheep hear his voice,
and he calleth his own sheep by name, and leadeth them out.
And when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before them, and the sheep follow him,
for they know his voice.
And a stranger will they not follow, but will flee from him, for they know not the voice of strangers.
This parable spake Jesus unto them, but they understood not what things they were which he spake unto them.
Then said Jesus unto them again, Verily, verily, I say unto you, I am the door of the sheep.
All that ever came before me are thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not hear them.
I am the door. By me, if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture.
The thief cometh not, but for to steal, and to kill, and to destroy.
I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly.
I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd giveth his life for the sheep.
But he that is a hireling and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth the wolf coming,
and leaveth the sheep, and fleeth, and the wolf catcheth them, and scattereth the sheep.
The hireling fleeth because he is a hireling, and careth not for the sheep.
I am the good shepherd, and know my sheep, and am known of mine.
As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father, and I lay down my life for the sheep.
And other sheep I have which are not of this fold.
Them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice.
And there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.
Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again.
No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself.
I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again.
This commandment have I received of my Father.
There was a division therefore again among the Jews for these sayings.
And many of them said, He hath a devil, and is mad. Why hear ye him?
Others said, These are not the words of him that hath a devil.
Can a devil open the eyes of the blind?
And it was at Jerusalem, the feast of the dedication, and it was winter.
And Jesus walked in the temple in Solomon's porch.
Then came the Jews round about him, and said unto him,
How long dost thou make us to doubt? If thou be the Christ, tell us plainly.
Jesus answered them, I told you, and ye believe not.
The works that I do in my Father's name, they bear witness of me.
But ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep, as I said unto you.
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.
And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand.
My Father which gave them to me is greater than all,
and no man is able to pluck them out of my Father's hand.
I and my Father are one.
Then the Jews took up stones again to stone him.
Jesus answered them, many good works have I showed you from my Father.
For which of these works do ye stone me?
The Jews answered him, saying,
For a good work we stone thee not, but for blasphemy,
and because that thou being a man makest thyself God.
Jesus answered them, Is it not written in your law, I said, ye are gods?
If he called them gods unto whom the word of God came,
and the scripture cannot be broken, say ye of him whom the Father hath sanctified,
and sent into the world thou blasphemest, because I said, I am the Son of God?
If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not.
But if I do, though ye believe not me, believe the works,
that ye may know and believe that the Father is in me, and I in him.
Therefore they sought again to take him, but he escaped out of their hand,
and went away again beyond Jordan into the place where John at first baptized,
and there he abode.
And many resorted unto him, and said,
John did no miracle, but all things that John spake of this man were true,
and many believed on him there.
Now a certain man was sick, named Lazarus of Bethany,
the town of Mary and her sister Martha.
It was that Mary which anointed the Lord with ointment,
and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick.
Therefore his sisters sent unto him, saying,
Lord, behold, he whom thou lovest is sick.
When Jesus heard that, he said,
This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God,
that the Son of God might be glorified thereby.
Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus.
When he had heard therefore that he was sick,
he abode two days still in the same place where he was.
Then after that, saith he to his disciples,
Let us go into Judea again.
His disciples say unto him,
Master, the Jews of late sought to stone thee,
and goest thou thither again?
Jesus answered, Are there not twelve hours in the day?
If any man walk in the day, he stumbleeth not,
because he seeth the light of this world.
But if a man walk in the night, he stumbleeth,
because there is no light in him.
These things said he, and after that he saith unto them,
Our friend Lazarus sleepeth, but I go that I may awake him out of sleep.
Then said his disciples, Lord, if he sleep, he shall do well.
Howbeit Jesus spake of his death,
but they thought that he had spoken of taking a rest in sleep.
Then said Jesus unto them plainly, Lazarus is dead,
and I am glad for your sakes that I was not there,
to the intent ye may believe.
Nevertheless, let us go unto him.
Then said Thomas, which is called Didymus,
unto his fellow disciples,
Let us also go that we may die with him.
Then when Jesus came, he found that he had lain in the grave
for four days already.
Now Bethany was nigh unto Jerusalem,
about fifteen furlongs off,
and many of the Jews came to Martha and Mary
to comfort them concerning their brother.
Then Martha, as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming,
went and met him, but Mary sat still in the house.
Then said Martha unto Jesus,
Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died,
but I know that even now, whatsoever thou wilt ask of God,
God will give it thee.
Jesus sayeth unto her, Thy brother shall rise again.
Martha sayeth unto him,
I know that he shall rise again in the resurrection
at the last day.
Jesus said unto her,
I am the resurrection and the life,
he that believeth in me, though he were dead,
yet shall he live, and whosoever liveth
and believeth in me shall never die.
Believest thou this?
She sayeth unto him, Ye Lord,
I believe that thou art the Christ, the Son of God,
which should come into the world.
And when she had so said, she went her way
and called Mary her sister secretly,
saying, The Master is come, and calleth for thee.
As soon as she heard that, she arose quickly
and came unto him.
Now Jesus was not yet come into the town,
but was in that place where Martha met him.
The Jews then, which were with her in the house
and comforted her, when they saw Mary
that she rose up hastily and went out,
followed her, saying, She goeth unto the grave
to weep there.
Then when Mary was come where Jesus was,
and saw him, she fell down at his feet,
saying unto him, Lord, if thou hadst been here,
my brother had not died.
When Jesus therefore saw her weeping,
and the Jews also weeping which came with her,
he groaned in the spirit and was troubled,
and said, Where have ye laid him?
They said unto him, Lord, come and see.
Jesus wept.
Then said the Jews, Behold how he loved him.
And some of them said, Could not this man
which opened the eyes of the blind have caused
that even this man should not have died?
Jesus therefore again groaning in himself
It was a cave and a stone lay upon it.
Jesus said, Take ye away the stone.
Martha, the sister of him that was dead,
saith unto him, Lord, by this time he stinketh,
for he hath been dead for days.
Jesus saith unto her, Said I not unto thee,
that if thou wouldst believe, thou shouldest see
the glory of God?
Then they took away the stone from the place
where the dead was laid.
And Jesus lifted up his eyes and said,
Father, I thank thee that thou hast heard me.
And I knew that thou hearest me always,
but because of the people which stand by I said it,
that they may believe that thou hast sent me.
And when he thus had spoken,
he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth.
And he that was dead came forth,
bound hand and foot with grave clothes,
and his face was bound about with a napkin.
Jesus saith unto him, Loose him and let him go.
Then many of the Jews which came to Mary
and had seen the things which Jesus did,
believed on him.
But some of them went their ways to the Pharisees
and told them what things Jesus had done.
Then gathered the chief priests and the Pharisees
a council, and said, What do we?
For this man doeth many miracles.
If we let him thus alone, all men will believe on him,
and the Romans shall come and take away
both our place and our nation.
And one of them named Caiaphas, being the high priest
that same year, said unto them,
Ye know nothing at all, nor consider that it is expedient
for us that one man should die for the people,
and that the whole nation perish not.
And this spake he not of himself.
But being the high priest that year,
he prophesied that Jesus should die for the nation,
and not for that nation only,
but that also he should gather together in one
the children of God that were scattered abroad.
Then from that day forth they took council together
for to put him to death.
Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews,
but went thence unto a country near to the wilderness
into a city called Ephraim,
and there continued with his disciples.
And the Jews' Passover was nigh at hand,
and many went out of the country up to Jerusalem
before the Passover to purify themselves.
Then sought they for Jesus and spake among themselves
as they stood in the temple.
What think ye, that he will not come to the feast?
Now both the chief priests and the Pharisees
had given a commandment,
that if any man knew where he were,
he should show it, that they might take him.
Then Jesus six days before the Passover
came to Bethany, where Lazarus was,
which had been dead, whom he raised from the dead.
There they made him a supper,
and Martha served, but Lazarus was one of them
that sat at the table with him.
Then took Mary a pound of ointment of spikenard,
very costly,
and anointed the feet of Jesus,
and wiped his feet with her hair,
and the house was filled with the odour of the ointment.
Then saith one of his disciples,
Judas Iscariot, Simon's son,
which should betray him,
Why was not this ointment sold for three hundred pence
and given to the poor?
This he said, not that he cared for the poor,
but because he was a thief and had a bag,
and bare what was put therein.
Then said Jesus, let her alone,
against the day of my burying hath she kept this,
for the poor always ye have with you,
but me ye have not always.
Much people of the Jews therefore knew
that he was there,
and they came not for Jesus' sake only,
but that they might see Lazarus also,
whom he had raised from the dead.
But the chief priests consulted that they might
put Lazarus also to death,
because that by reason of him many of the Jews
went away and believed on Jesus.
On the next day much people that were come to the feast,
when they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem,
took branches of palm trees and went forth
to meet him, and cried, Hosanna,
blessed is the king of Israel that cometh in the name
of the Lord. And Jesus,
when he had found a young ass, sat thereon
as it is written, Fear not, daughter of Zion,
behold thy king cometh,
sitting on an ass's colt.
These things understood not his disciples
at the first, but when Jesus was glorified,
then remembered they that these things
were written of him, and that they had done
these things unto him.
The people therefore that was with him when he called
Lazarus out of his grave and raised him from the dead,
bear record. For this cause
the people also met him, for that
they heard that he had done this miracle.
The Pharisees therefore said among themselves,
Perceive ye how ye prevail
nothing, behold the world is gone after
him. And there were certain Greeks
among them that came up to worship at the feast.
The same came therefore to Philip,
which was of Bethsaida of Galilee,
and desired him saying, Sir,
we would see Jesus. Philip
cometh and telleth Andrew, and again
Andrew and Philip tell Jesus. And Jesus
answered them saying, The hour
has come that the Son of Man should be glorified.
Verily, verily, I say unto
you, Except a corn of wheat
fall into the ground and die, it abideth
alone. But if it die, it
bringeth forth much fruit.
He that loveth his life shall lose it,
and he that hateth his life in this world
shall keep it unto life eternal.
If any man serve me, let him follow me,
and where I am, there shall also
my servant be. If any man
serve me, him will my father honor.
Now is my soul troubled, and what
shall I say? Father, save me from
this hour? But for this cause
came I unto this hour. Father,
glorify thy name. Then came there
a voice from heaven saying, I have both
glorified it, and will glorify it again.
The people therefore that stood by
and heard it, said that it thundered.
Others said, An angel spake to him.
Jesus answered and said,
This voice came not because of me, but
for your sakes. Now is the judgment
of this world. Now shall the prince of this world
be cast out, and I, if I be
lifted up from the earth, will draw all men
unto me. This he said, signifying
what death he should die.
The people answered him, We have heard out of
the law that Christ abideth forever,
and how sayest thou the Son of Man must be
lifted up? Who is this Son of Man?
Then Jesus said unto them, Get
a little while is the light with you.
Walk while ye have the light, lest
darkness come upon you. For he that walketh
in darkness knoweth not whither he goeth.
While ye have light, believe in the light,
that ye may be the children of light.
These things spake Jesus, and
departed, and did hide himself from
them. But though he had done so many
miracles before them, yet they believed not on
him. That the saying of Isaias the
prophet might be fulfilled, which he spake,
Lord, who hath believed our report,
and to whom hath the arm of the Lord been
revealed? Therefore they could not believe,
because that Isaias said again,
He hath blinded their eyes and
hardened their heart, that they should not see with
their eyes, nor understand with their heart,
and be converted, and I should heal them.
These things said Isaias, when he saw his
glory, and spake of him. Nevertheless,
among the chief rulers, also many
believed on him. But because of the
Pharisees, they did not confess him, lest
they should be put out of the synagogue.
For they loved the praise of men, more than the praise
of God. Jesus cried and said,
He that believeth on me, believeth
not on me, but on him that sent me.
And he that seeth me, seeth
him that sent me. I am come a
light into the world, that whosoever believeth
on me, should not abide in darkness.
And if any man hear my words, and
believe not, I judge him not.
For I came not to judge the world, but to save
the world. He that rejecteth me,
and receiveth not my words, hath one
that judgeth him. The word that I have
spoken, the same shall judge him in the
last day. For I have not spoken
of myself, but the Father which sent
me. He gave me a commandment, what I should
say, and what I should speak.
And I know that his commandment is life everlasting.
Whatsoever I speak therefore,
even as the Father said unto me,
so I speak.
Jesus knew that his hour was come that he should depart out of this world unto
the Father having loved his own which were in the world he loved them unto the
end and supper being ended the devil having now put into the heart of
Judas Iscariot Simon's son to betray him Jesus knowing that the Father had given
all things into his hands and that he was come from God and went to God he
riseth from supper and laid aside his garments and took a towel and girded
himself after that he poureth water into a basin and began to wash the disciples
feet and to wipe them with the towel wherewith he was girded then cometh he
to Simon Peter and Peter saith unto him Lord does thou wash my feet Jesus
answered and said unto him what I do thou knowest not now but thou shalt know
hereafter Peter saith unto him thou shalt never wash my feet Jesus answered
him if I wash thee not thou hast no part with me Simon Peter saith unto him Lord
not my feet only but also my hands and my head Jesus said to him he that is
washed needeth not save to wash his feet but is clean every whit and ye are clean
but not all for he knew who should betray him therefore said he ye are not
all clean so after he had washed their feet and I taken his garments and was
set down again he said unto them know you what I have done to you ye call me
master and Lord and ye say well for so I am if I then your Lord and master have
washed your feet ye also ought to wash one another's feet for I have given you
an example that you should do as I have done to you verily verily I say unto you
the servant is not greater than his Lord neither he that is sent greater than he
that sent him if you know these things happier ye if you do them I spate not of
you all I know whom I have chosen but that the scripture may be fulfilled he
that eateth bro with me hath lifted up his heel against me now I tell you
before it come that when it is come to pass you may believe that I am he
verily verily I say unto you he that receiveth whomsoever I send receiveth me
and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me when Jesus had thus said he
was troubled in spirit and testified and said verily verily I say unto you that
one of you shall betray me then the disciples looked one on another doubting
of whom you spake now there was leaning on Jesus's bosom one of his disciples
whom Jesus loved Simon Peter therefore beckoned to him that he should ask who
it should be of whom he spake he then lying on Jesus's breast saith unto him
Lord who is it Jesus answered he it is to whom I shall give a sop when I have
dipped it and when he had dipped the sop he gave it to Jesus Iscariot the son of
Simon and after the sop Satan entered into him then said Jesus unto him that
thou doest do quickly now no man at the table knew for what
intent he spake this unto him for some of them thought because Judas had the
bag that Jesus had sent unto him by those things that we have need of
against the feast or that he should give something to the poor he then having
received the sop went immediately out and it was night therefore when he was
gone out Jesus said now is the son of man glorified and God is glorified in
him if God be glorified in him God shall also glorify him in himself and he'll
straightaway glorify him little children yet a little while I am with you he shall
seek me and as I said unto the Jews whether I go you cannot come so now I
say to you a new commandment I give unto you that you love one another as I have
loved you that you also love one another by this shall all men know that you are
my disciples if you have loved one to another Simon Peter said unto him Lord
whither goest thou Jesus answered him whether I go thou canst not follow me
now but thou shalt follow me afterwards Peter said unto him Lord why cannot I
follow thee now I will lay down my life for thy sake Jesus answered him wilt
thou lay down thy life for my sake verily verily I say unto thee the cock
shall not crow till thou hast denied me thrice
let not your heart be troubled ye believe in God believe also
in me and my father's house are many mansions if it were not so I would have
told you I go to prepare a place for you and if I go and prepare a place for you
I will come again and receive you unto myself that where I am there ye may be
also and whither I go you know and the way you know Thomas said unto him Lord
we know not whether thou goest and how can we know the way Jesus said unto him
I am the way the truth and the life no man cometh unto the father but by me if
ye had known me you should have known my father also and from henceforth you know
him and have seen him Philip said unto him Lord show us the father and it
suffice with us Jesus said unto him have I been so
a long time with you and yet has thou not known me Philip he that has seen me
hath seen the father and how sayest thou then show us the father believe is
thou not that I am in the father and the father of me the words I speak unto
you I speak not of myself but the father that dwells with me he doeth the works
believe me that I am in the father and the father and me or else believe me for
the very work sake verily verily I say unto you he that believeth on me the
works that I do shall he do also in greater works than these shall he do
because I go unto my father and whatsoever ye shall ask in my name that
will I do that the father may be glorified to the son if ye shall ask
anything in my name I will do it if you love me keep my commandments and I'll
pray the father and he shall give you another comforter that he may abide with
you forever even the spirit of truth who the world cannot receive because the
seeeth him not neither knoweth him but ye know him for he dwelleth with you and
I will not leave you comfortless I will come to you yet a little while and the
world seeeth me no more but you see me because I live you shall live also at
that day you shall know that I am in my father and ye and me and I in you he
that hath my commandments and keepeth them he it is that loveth me and he that
loveth me shall be loved in my father and I will love him and will manifest
myself to him Jesus said unto him not asgarriate Lord how is it that thou
wilt manifest thyself unto us and not unto the world Jesus answered and said
unto him if a man loved me he will keep my words and my father will love him
and we will come unto him and make our abode with him he that loveth me not
keepeth not my stayings and the word which he hears not mine but the father's
sent me these things have I spoken unto you being yet present with you but the
comforter which is the Holy Ghost whom the father will send in my name he shall
teach you all things and bring all things to your remembrance whatsoever I
have said unto you peace I leave with you my peace I give unto you not as the
world giveth give I unto you let not your heart be troubled neither let it be
afraid ye have heard how I said unto you I go away and come again unto you
if ye loved me you would rejoice because I said I go unto the father for my
father is greater than I now I have told you before it come to pass that when it
is come to pass ye might believe hereafter I will not talk much with you
for the prince of this world cometh and have nothing in me but that the world
may know that I love the father and as the father gave me commandment even so I
arise let us go hence I am the true vine and my father is the husband
man every branch and me that beareth not fruit he taketh away and every branch
that beareth fruit he purges it that it may bring forth more fruit now you are
clean through the word which I have spoken unto you abide in me and I in you
as the branch cannot bear fruit of itself except it abide in the vine no
more can ye except ye abide in me I am the vine ye are the branches he that
abideth in me and I and him the same bringeth forth much fruit for without me
ye could do nothing if a man abide not in me he is cast forth as a branch and
is withered and men gather them and cast them into the fire and they are burned
if ye abide in me and my words abide in you ye shall ask what ye will and it
shall be done unto you herein is my father glorified that ye bear much fruit
so shall ye be my disciples as the father hath loved me so have I loved you
continue ye in my love if ye keep my commandments you shall abide in my love
even as I have kept my father's commandments and abide in his love these
things have I spoken to you that my joy might remain in you and that your joy
might be full this is my commandment that ye love one another as I have loved
you greater love hath no man than this that a man lay down his life for his
friends ye are my friends if you do whatsoever I command you henceforth I
call you not servants for the servant knoweth not what his Lord doeth but I
have called you friends for all things that I have heard of my father I have
ye have not chosen me but I have chosen you and ordained you that ye should go
and bring forth fruit and that your fruit shall remain that whatsoever ye
shall ask of the father of my name he may give it you these things I command
you that you love one another if the world hate you you know that it hated me
before I hated you if you were of the world the world would love its own but
because you are not of the world but I have chosen you out of the world
therefore the world hated you remember the word that I said unto you the
servant is not greater than his Lord if they have persecuted me they will also
persecute you if they have kept my saying they will keep yours also but all these
things they will do unto you for my name's sake because they know not him
that sent me if I had not come and spoken unto them they had not had sin but
now they have no cloak for their sin he that hateth me hateth my father also if
I had not done among them the works which none other man did they had not
had sin but now have they both seen and hated both me and my father but this
cometh the past that the word might be fulfilled that is written in their law
they hated me without a cause but when the comforter is come whom I will send
unto you from the father even the spirit of truth which proceedeth from the father
he shall testify of me and ye also shall be a witness because ye have been with me
from the beginning these things have I spoken unto you that ye
should not be offended they shall put you out of the synagogues yea the time
cometh that whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God's service and
these things will they do unto you because they have not known the father
nor me but these things have I told you that when the time shall come you may
remember that I told you of them and these things I said not unto you at the
beginning because I was with you but now I go my way to him that sent me and none
of you asketh me whither goest thou but because I have said these things unto
you sorrow have filled your heart nevertheless I tell you the truth it is
expedient for you that I go away for if I go not away the comforter will not
come unto you but if I depart I will send him unto you and when he is come he will
reprove the world of sin and of righteousness and a judgment of sin
because they believe not on me of righteousness because I go to my father
and ye see me no more of judgment because the prince of this world is
judged I have yet many things to say unto you but you cannot bear them now
help me it when he the spirit of truth is come he will guide you into all truth
for he shall not speak of himself but whatsoever he shall hear that shall he
speak and he will show you things to come he shall glorify me for he shall
receive of mine and shall show it unto you all things that the father hath are
mine therefore said I that he shall take of mine and shall show it unto you a
little while and you shall see me because I go to the father then said
some of his disciples among themselves what is this that he said unto us a
little while and you shall not see me and again a little while and you shall
see me and because I go to the father they said therefore what is this that he
said a little while we cannot tell what he said now Jesus knew that they were
desirous to ask him and said unto them do you inquire among yourselves of that
I said a little while and you shall not see me and again a little while and you
shall see me barely barely I say unto you that you shall weep and lament but
the world shall rejoice and you shall be sorrowful but your sorrow shall be turned
into joy a woman when he is in travail has sorrow because her hour is come but
as soon as he is delivered of the child she remembers no more the anguish for
joy that a man is born into the world and you now therefore have sorrow but I
will see you again and your heart shall rejoice and you joy no man taketh from
you and in that day you shall ask me nothing barely barely I say unto you
whatsoever you shall ask of the father in my name he will give it to you hitherto
have you asked nothing in my name ask and you shall receive that your joy may
be full these things have I spoken unto you in proverbs but the time cometh when
I shall no more speak unto you in proverbs but I shall show you plainly of
the father at that day he shall ask of my name and I say not unto you that I
will pay the father for you for the father himself loveth you because ye
have loved me and have believed that I came out from God I came forth from the
father and then come into the world again I leave the world and go to the
father his disciples said unto him lo now speakest thou plainly and speakest
no proverb now are we sure that thou knowest all things and needest not that
any man should ask thee by this we believe that thou camest forth from God
Jesus answered them do ye now believe behold our cometh yea is now come that
ye shall be scattered every man to his own and shall leave me alone and yet I
am not alone because the father is with me these things I have spoken unto you
that in me ye might have peace and the world you shall have tribulation but be
good here I have overcome the world these words baked Jesus and
lifted up his eyes to heaven and said father the hour is come glorify thy son
that thy son also may glorify thee as thou has given him power over all flesh
that he should give eternal life to as many as thou has given him and this is
life eternal that they might know thee the only true God and Jesus Christ whom
thou has sent I have glorified thee on the earth I have finished the work which
thou gavest me to do and now oh father glorify thou me with thine own self with
the glory which I had with thee before the world was I have manifested thy
name unto the moon which thou gavest me out of the world thine they were and
thou gavest them me and they have kept thy word now they have known that all
things whatsoever thou has given me are of thee for I have given unto them the
words which thou gavest me and they have received them and have known surely
that I came out from thee and they have believed that thou this send me I pray
for them I pray not for the world but for them which thou has given me for
they are thine and all mine are thine and thine are mine and I am glorified in
them and now I am no more in the world but these are in the world and I come to
thee holy father keep through thine own name those whom thou has given me that
they may be one as we are while I was with them in the world I kept them in
thy name those that thou gavest me I have kept and none of them is lost but
the center prediction that the scripture might be fulfilled and now come I to thee
and these things I speak in the world that they might have my joy fulfilled in
themselves I have given them thy word and the world hath hated them because
they are not of the world even as I am not of the world I pray not that thou
should take them out of the world but thou should keep them from the evil they
are not at the world even as I am not at the world sanctify them through thy
truth thy word is truth as thou has sent me into the world even so have I also
sent them into the world and for their sakes I sanctify myself that they also
might be sanctified through the truth neither pray I for these alone but for
them also which shall believe on me through their word that they all may be
one as thou father are to me and I am thee that they also may be one in us
that the world may believe that thou hast sent me and the glory which thou
gavest me I have given them that they may be one even as we are one I am them
and thou and me that they may be made perfect in one and that the world may
know that thou hast sent me and has loved them as thou hast loved me father
I will that they also whom thou hast given me be with me where I am that they
may behold my glory which thou has given me for thou lovest me before the
foundation of the world oh righteous father the world hath not known thee but
I have known thee and these have known that thou hast sent me and I have
declared unto them thy name and will declare it that the love wherewith thou
has loved me may be in them and I am them
When Jesus had spoken these words, he went forth with his disciples over the brook Sedron, where was a garden into which he entered, and his disciples.
And Judas also, which betrayed him, knew the place. For Jesus oft times resorted thither with his disciples.
Judas then, having received a band of men and officers from the chief priests and Pharisees, cometh thither with lanterns and torches and weapons.
Jesus therefore, knowing all things that should come upon him, went forth and said unto them, Whom seek ye?
They answered him, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus sayeth unto them, I am he, and Judas also, which betrayed him, stood with them.
As soon then as he had said unto them, I am he, they went backward and fell to the ground.
Then asked he them again, Whom seek ye? And they said, Jesus of Nazareth.
Jesus answered, I have told you that I am he. If therefore ye seek me, let these go their way.
That the same might be fulfilled which he spake of them, which thou gavest me, have I lost none.
Then Simon Peter, having a sword, drew it, and smote the high priest's servant, and cut off his right ear. The servant's name was Malchus.
Then said Jesus unto Peter, Put up thy sword into the sheath, the cup which my father hath given me. Shall I not drink it?
Then the band and the captain of offices of the Jews took Jesus and bound him, and led him away to Annas first.
For he was father-in-law to Caiaphas, which was the high priest that same year.
Now Caiaphas was he which gave counsel to the Jews that it was expedient that one man should die for the people.
And Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did another disciple.
That disciple was known unto the high priest, and went in with Jesus into the palace of the high priest.
But Peter stood at the door without, then went out that other disciple, which was known unto the high priest, and spake unto her, that kept the door and brought in Peter.
Then saith the damsel that kept the door unto Peter, Art not thou also one of this man's disciples? He saith, I am not.
And the servants and officers stood there, who had made a fire of coals, for it was cold.
And they warmed themselves, and Peter stood with them, and warmed himself.
The high priest then asked Jesus of his disciples, and of his doctrine.
Jesus answered him, I spake openly to the world.
I ever taught in the synagogue, and in the temple, whither the Jews always resort, and in secret have I said nothing.
Why askest thou me? Ask them which heard me, what I have said unto them. Behold, they know what I said.
And when he had thus spoken, one of the officers which stood by struck Jesus with the palm of his hand, saying, Answerest thou the high priest so?
Jesus answered him, If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil. But if well, why smitest thou me?
Now Annas had sent him bound unto Caiaphas, the high priest.
And Simon Peter stood and warmed himself. They said therefore unto him, Art not thou also one of his disciples? He denied it, and said, I am not.
One of the servants of the high priest, being his kinsman, whose ear Peter cut off, saith, Did not I see thee in the garden with him?
Peter then denied again, and immediately the cock crew.
Then led they Jesus from Caiaphas unto the hall of judgment, and it was early.
And they themselves went not into the judgment hall, lest they should be defiled, but that they might eat the Passover.
Pilate then went out unto them, and said, What accusation bring thee against this man?
They answered and said unto him, If he were not a malfactor, we would not have delivered him unto thee.
Then said Pilate unto them, Take ye him, and judge him according to your law.
The Jews therefore said unto him, It is not lawful for us to put any man to death, that the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled which he spake, signifying what death he should die.
Then Pilate entered into the judgment hall again, and called Jesus, and said unto him, Art thou the king of the Jews?
Jesus answered him, Sayest thou this thing of thyself, or did others tell it thee of me?
Pilate answered, Am I a Jew? Thine own nation and the chief priest have delivered thee unto me.
What hast thou done? Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of this world.
If my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews.
But now is my kingdom not from hence.
Pilate therefore said unto him, Art thou a king then?
Jesus answered, Thou sayest that I am a king. To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth.
Every one that is of the truth heareth my voice.
Pilate saith unto him, What is truth?
And when he had said this, he went out again unto the Jews, and saith unto them, I find in him no fault at all.
But ye have a custom that I should release unto you one at the Passover.
Will ye therefore that I release unto you the king of the Jews?
Then cried they all again, saying, Not this man, but Barabbas. Now Barabbas was a robber.
Then Pilate therefore took Jesus and scourged him, and the soldiers plated a crown of thorns and put it on his head.
And they put on him a purple robe, and said, Hail, king of the Jews! And they smote him with their hands.
Pilate therefore went forth again, and saith unto them, Behold, I bring him forth to you, that ye may know that I find no fault in him.
Then came Jesus forth, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple robe. And Pilate saith unto them, Behold the man.
When the chief priests therefore and officers saw him, they cried out, saying, Crucify him, crucify him.
Pilate saith unto them, Take ye him and crucify him, for I find no fault in him.
The Jews answered him, We have a law, and by our law he ought to die, because he made himself the son of God.
When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he was the more afraid, and went again into the judgment hall and saith unto Jesus, Whence art thou?
But Jesus gave him no answer. Then saith Pilate unto him, Speakest thou not unto me?
Knowest thou not that I have power to crucify thee, and have power to release thee?
Jesus answered, Thou couldst have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from above. Therefore he that delivered me unto thee hath the greater sin.
And from thenceforth Pilate sought to release him. But the Jews cried out, saying, If thou let this man go, thou art not Caesar's friend.
Whosoever maketh himself a king speaketh against Caesar.
When Pilate therefore heard that saying, he brought Jesus forth and sat down in the judgment seat, in a place that is called the pavement, but in the Hebrew, gabatah.
And it was the preparation of the Passover, and about the sixth hour. And he saith unto the Jews, Behold your king.
But they cried out, Away with him, away with him, crucify him. Pilate saith unto them, Shall I crucify your king?
The chief priests answered, We have no king but Caesar. Then delivered he him therefore unto them to be crucified. And they took Jesus and led him away.
And he, bearing his cross, went forth into a place called the place of a skull, which is called in the Hebrew, Galgotha, where they crucified him, and two other with him on either side, and Jesus in the midst.
And Pilate wrote a title and put it on the cross, and the writing was, Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews.
This title then read many of the Jews, for the place where Jesus was crucified was nigh to the city, and it was written in Hebrew and Greek and Latin.
Then said the chief priests of the Jews to Pilate, Write not the King of the Jews, but that he said, I am King of the Jews.
Pilate answered, What I have written, I have written.
Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took his garments and made four parts, to every soldier a part, and also his coat.
Now the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout.
They said therefore among themselves, Let us not rend it, but cast lots for it, whose it shall be, that the scripture might be fulfilled, which saith, They parted my raiment among them, and for my vesture they did cast lots.
These things therefore the soldiers did.
Now there stood by the cross of Jesus his mother and his mother's sister Mary, the wife of Cleophas and Mary Magdalene.
When Jesus therefore saw his mother and the disciple standing by whom he loved, he saith unto his mother, Woman, behold thy son.
Then saith he to the disciple, Behold thy mother.
And from that hour that disciple took her unto his own home.
After this Jesus knowing that all things were now accomplished, that the scripture might be fulfilled, saith, I thirst.
Now there was set a vessel full of vinegar, and they filled a sponge with vinegar, and put it upon his soap, and put it to his mouth.
When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, It is finished, and he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost.
The Jews therefore, because it was the preparation that the bodies should not remain upon the cross on the Sabbath day, for that Sabbath day was in high day,
besought Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken away.
Then came the soldiers and break the legs of the first and of the other which was crucified with him.
But when they came to Jesus and saw that he was dead already, they break not his legs.
But one of the soldiers with a spear pierced his side, and forthwith came their outblood and water.
And he that saw it bare record, and his record is true, and he knoweth that he saith true, that ye might believe.
For these things were done that the scripture might be fulfilled, a bone of him shall not be broken.
And again another scripture saith, They shall look on him whom they pierced.
And after this Joseph of Aromanthia, being a disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews,
besought Pilate that he might take away the body of Jesus, and Pilate gave him leave.
He came therefore and took the body of Jesus, and there came also Nicodemus, which at the first came to Jesus by night,
and brought a mixture of myrrh and alas about an hundred pound weight.
Then took they the body of Jesus and wound it in linen cloths, with the spices as the manner of the Jews is to bury.
Now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden, and in the garden a new sepulchre wherein was never man yet laid.
There lay they Jesus, therefore because the Jews' preparation day for the sepulchre was nigh at hand.
The first day of the week cometh Mary Magdalene early, when it was yet dark, unto the sepulchre,
and seeth the stone taken away from the sepulchre.
Then she runneth, and cometh to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved, and saith unto them,
They have taken away the Lord out of the sepulchre, and we know not where they have laid him.
Peter therefore went forth, and that other disciple, and came to the sepulchre, so they ran both together.
And the other disciple did outrun Peter, and came first to the sepulchre.
And he, stooping down and looking in, saw the linen cloths, lying.
Yet went he not in.
Then cometh Simon Peter, following him, and went into the sepulchre, and seeth the linen cloths lie.
And the napkin, that was about his head, not lying with the linen cloths, but wrapped together in a place by itself.
Then went in also that other disciple, which came first to the sepulchre, and he saw and believed.
For as yet they knew not the scripture, that he must rise again from the dead.
Then the disciples went away, again unto their own home.
But Mary stood without at the sepulchre weeping.
And as she wept, she stooped down and looked into the sepulchre.
And seeth two angels in white sitting, the one at the head and the other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain.
And they say unto her, Woman, why weepest thou?
She sayeth unto them, Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him.
And when she had thus said, she turned herself back and saw Jesus standing, and knew not that it was Jesus.
Jesus sayeth unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? Whom seeketh thou?
She, supposing him to be the gardener, sayeth unto him, Sir, if thou have borne him, hence tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away.
Jesus sayeth unto her, Mary, she turned herself, and sayeth unto him, Rabboni, which is to say Master.
Jesus sayeth unto her, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father.
But go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God.
Mary Magdalene came and told the disciples that she had seen the Lord, and that he had spoken these things unto her.
Then, the same day at evening, being the first day of the week when the doors were shut where the disciples were assembled, for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, saying unto them, Peace be unto you.
And when he had so said, he showed unto them his hands and his side. Then were the disciples glad when they saw the Lord.
Then said Jesus to them again, Peace be unto you, as my Father hath sent me, even so send I you.
And when he had said this, he breathed on them, and sayeth unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost.
Whosoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whosoever sins ye retain, they are retained.
But Thomas, one of the twelve called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came.
The other disciples therefore said unto him, We have seen the Lord, but he said unto them, Except I shall see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe.
And after eight days again his disciples were within, and Thomas with them.
Then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said, Peace be unto you.
Then saith he to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands, and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side, and be not faithless, but believing.
And Thomas answered and said unto him, My Lord, and my God.
Jesus saith unto him, Thomas, because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed. Blessed are they that have not seen and yet have believed.
And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his disciples, which are not written in this book.
But these are written that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life through his name.
After these things Jesus showed himself again to his disciples at the Sea of Tiberias, and on this wise showed he himself.
There were together Simon Peter and Thomas called Didymus, and Nathaniel of Cana and Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and two other of his disciples.
Simon Peter saith unto them, I go a-fishing. They say unto him, We also go with thee.
They went forth and entered into a ship immediately, and that night they caught nothing.
But when the morning was now come, Jesus stood on the shore, but the disciples knew not that it was Jesus.
Then Jesus saith unto them, Children, have ye any meat? They answered him, No.
And he said unto them, Cast the net on the right side of the ship, and ye shall find.
They cast therefore, and now they were not able to draw it for the multitude of fish.
Therefore that disciple whom Jesus loved saith unto Peter, It is the Lord.
Now when Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he girt his fisher's coat unto him, for he was naked, and did cast himself into the sea.
And the other disciples came in a little ship, for they were not far from land, but as it were two hundred cubits.
Dragging the net with fish. As soon then as they were come to land, they saw a fire of coals there, and fish laid thereon and bred.
Jesus saith unto them, Bring of the fish which ye have now caught.
Simon Peter went up and drew the net to land, full of great fish, in hundred and fifty and three.
And for all there were so many, yet was not the net broken.
Jesus saith unto them, Come and dine. And none of the disciples durst ask him, Who art thou, knowing that it was the Lord.
Jesus then cometh and taketh bread, and giveth them and fish likewise.
This is now the third time that Jesus showed himself to his disciples, after that he was risen from the dead.
So when they had dined, Jesus saith to Simon Peter, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these?
He saith unto him, Yea, Lord, thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my lambs.
He saith to him again the second time, Simon, son of Jonas, loveth thou me?
He saith unto him, Yea, Lord, thou knowest that I love thee. He saith unto him, Feed my sheep.
He saith unto him the third time, Simon, son of Jonas, loveth thou me?
Peter was grieved, because he said unto him the third time, Loveth thou me?
And he said unto him, Lord, thou knowest all things. Thou knowest that I love thee. Jesus saith unto him, Feed my sheep.
Verily, verily, I say unto thee, When thou wast young, thou girded thyself and walkest whither thou wouldest.
But when thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not.
This spake he, signifying by what death he should glorify God. And when he had spoken this, he saith unto him, Follow me.
Then Peter turning about seeth the disciple whom Jesus loved, following, which also leaned on his breast at supper, and said, Lord, which is he that betrayeth thee?
Peter seeing him saith to Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man do? Jesus saith unto him, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? Follow thou me.
Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, That that disciple should not die. Yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall not die. But if I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?
This is the disciple which testifieth of these things, and wrote these things. And we know that his testimony is true, and there are also many other things which Jesus did.
The which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books that should be written. Amen.
Amen.